The much-anticipated movie night, which served as a fundraiser for the local SPCA, took place at the Makhado Crossing Mall on Friday night. The festive atmosphere at the mall’s parking area was, unfortunately, slightly subdued by cold weather and a series of technical problems. “On behalf of the Louis Trichardt SPCA, Makhado Crossing Mall and Movie Mania, we would like to apologise to the public who attended the movie night for the show starting late and the technical problems with regard to the sound during the broadcast,” said Ms Lesley Gaigher, chairperson of the local SPCA. Gaigher explained that when Movie Mania had approached the SPCA, their members had thoroughly researched the company before deciding that the event would be a good one to co-host. “The reviews and ratings we found were all positive, with no unsatisfied customers reporting a bad experience. The owner of Movie Mania, Brian, always arrived early for meetings to make arrangements for the event and his professionalism was of the highest standard. We agreed to the terms of the SPCA receiving 10% of the profits of ticket sales,” she explained. Unfortunately for the organisers, Friday night did not go as planned. Due to car problems and a family emergency, Brian could not stick to the schedule to arrive at Makhado Crossing at 13:00 and to have the screen set up before 16:00. When this was finally done, the machine used to broadcast the sound to the vehicles was found to be defective, with no time left to attend to the problem as all the shops had already closed. “Thus, the showing started late and the only sound to accompany the movie had to come from the two speakers positioned right at the front. This turned out to be woefully inadequate, leading to a number of people leaving for home,” said Lesley. The SPCA members working at the event gave their apologies to everyone who left and offered to refund them for their tickets. “We are humbled and very grateful that most of the people insisted that the monies be donated to the SPCA instead. Movie Mania have waived their fees. However, the SPCA members decided that we would still cover all their proven expenses for the event,” she added. Movie Mania would love to be given the opportunity to redeem themselves by offering a free show in the near future to the Louis Trichardt community. Please keep watching the local papers for more information. The members of the SPCA thanked everyone who attended the show, regardless of whether they stayed or not. “We appreciate your support, understanding and kindness in light of the disappointing event. We would also like to thank the management of Makhado Crossing Mall for hosting us, with a special mention to Zwiande Mbedzi for his hard work and commitment to saving the day! We are truly grateful to Zwiande and the rest of the management team who offered the venue to the SPCA and Movie Mania, for free, as their way of giving back to the community,” said Lesley. She also thanked Japie van Heerden, who arrived with new cables and his knowledge to try to get the sound back, even if that was to no avail. “To all the persons who set up stalls in the parking lot. A night market is clearly an avenue to explore! Thank you, Hugo van Rooyen, for your generous contribution to our very own popcorn machine and to Defendum for providing security at the event. Another shout out goes to Talisman for the use of their generator and portable toilets, both completely free of charge, and to Ayrton Waste Removals for putting out bins - again, not sending us a bill!” “Lastly, to our SPCA teammates and the Movie Mania crew, thank you too for all the arrangements and your efforts. Regardless of the outcome, we still appreciate the hard work that went into planning the function and on the night,” she said. Lesley concluded by quoting Winston Churchill: “Success is not final, and failure is not fatal. It’s the courage to continue that counts.”. “So, chins up, and remember - the show must go on!” she said. 