A convoy of protesting drivers from the Makhado Long Distance Taxi Association (MALLTA) and LTT-Musina Taxi Association held up traffic along the main route on the N1 to Polokwane on Tuesday, 7 June, as they embarked on a go-slow drive to the office of the Department of Roads and Transport in Polokwane. Protesting drivers were driving from Louis Trichardt to Polokwane without ferrying any commuters, while some commuters tried to hitch rides from private motorists to get to Polokwane and their places of work. The LTT-Musina Taxi Association and MALLTA operators accuse the Beitbridge Taxi Association (BTA) of still invading their territory and poaching their customers, despite a ruling that was made by the Polokwane High Court in 2019. The ruling came into effect in 2020 after the same conflicts between the associations flared up and the BTA was prohibited from operating on the Musina-to-Louis Trichardt route, as well as the Musina-to-Polokwane route. The Limpopo Department of Roads and Transport, as well as the SAPS, were instructed by the court to enforce the law by issuing fines and arresting BTA members, should they operate on these routes. The LTT-Musina Taxi Association and MALTA members complained that the court order was not being implemented as, a week or so later that same year (2020), their members were again intimidated by BTA members, who blocked their entrance to the Musina Taxi Rank to prevent them from operating. Four BTA members were arrested at the time. The chairperson of the Makhado Long Distance Taxi Association, Mr Mathakha Maliaga, said that their taxis had not been able to ferry Musina commuters for four years now as their taxis were being chased away by BTA members. He accused the Department of Transport and Community Safety once again of failing to implement the court order that had ruled in their favour. He said that taxi owners demanded that the government intervene to stop what they called “pirate taxis” from ferrying people, and that they would suspend their operations until the government intervened. He said that in April this year, a memorandum was handed over at the offices of Premier Stan Mathabatha and MEC for the Department of Roads and Transport Mavhungu Lerule Ramakhanya. They were given seven days to respond to their demands, but neither of the two departments had responded to the memorandum to this day. That is why, Maliaga said, they had embarked on a go-slow drive along the N1 to Polokwane. “I wish that the government could protect us in the matter. All these illegal taxis must be removed. The situation is only worsening,” said Maliaga. Commuters who had to get to work and earn their own living, however, were not sympathetic to the ongoing taxi feud. “I left home at 05:00 this morning, hoping that I would get transport, but it is clear that there is no transport for us. It is really tough for us. It is really unfair, commuters receiving the shortest end because of these disputes over taxi routes. They should resolve their issues because now we are stranded. We can’t even go to work and it’s cold,” one of the commuters said. “I couldn’t get to work on time because there are no taxis. The situation is bad,” said another commuter. The letter, signed by the acting head of the Department of Transport and Community Safety, Steve Matjena on 7 June, said that they had received the complaints from the two associations and that the department committed to a plan of action. Matjena said that, on 9 June, officials from his department, the police and officials from the Musina Municipality would be ushering the taxi association to the taxi rank to see that their operations ran smoothly. He also said that they would make follow-ups on old open cases to get them finalised. 