Most people seem to have come to terms with load shedding by now. After all, no temper tantrums or toy-toying will change this reality for South Africans. Not in the near future, anyway. What still pains Louis Trichardt residents, however, is the fact that nearly every time load shedding is enforced, some greater power-related problem results from it: an electrical cable is damaged, or a power unit blows up somewhere, leaving parts of town without electricity for undetermined periods - beyond the scheduled load shedding times. No guarantee can be given that “lights on” after load shedding will be without complications. In fact, “lights on” often results in lights off again. Instead of holding their breath, residents now pray out loud when the electricity is expected to be switched back on after load shedding, because so often, at that very moment when the switch is being flipped, a hitch kicks in at one of the power stations. Sometimes the entire network is affected and the whole town is left without electricity until the problem is resolved. In certain parts of the town, power outages are a constant problem – even under normal circumstances. The question that must be asked here is whether Makhado Municipality’s power-supply system as a whole is up to standard and able to handle the additional impact load shedding has on it (the switching off and switching back on again within short periods of time). The answer seems obvious enough, just by looking at the town watch’s WhatsApp groups, which are often flooded by reports of power outages in some areas. The Zoutpansberger directed this question to municipal spokesperson Louis Bobodi, who (of course) denied any problems. “Our network and power-supply system have ample and seamless capacity to handle and arrest the aftereffects of load shedding,” he said. When Bobodi was asked why the town so often experiences power interruptions at the moment when the lights are being switched back on after load shedding, he said “we are not aware of this problem”, even when we pointed out to him that technicians from the municipality are sent out to fix the problem each time. That the municipality is “not aware” when whole sections of the town are left without electricity is ridiculous, and more so that they are not aware how often their own technicians are being sent out to repair power units in the face of load shedding. The struggle to get the municipality to admit that the problem in general might be bigger than they are purporting, continues. 