For months now, if not years, Anderson Street residents in Louis Trichardt have had to endure the unsightly view of an informal recycling plant being operated from a residential property near the corner to Rissik Street. After the Zoutpansberger enquired how this practice could be allowed, the Makhado Municipality finally acted. “This has been going on for two years now,” said one irate neighbour. She, like many others, said they did not know where to complain to anymore. All found it strange that the Makhado Municipality apparently had never taken any notice. When the Zoutpansberger visited the property, we were met with literally a mountain of cardboard boxes, plastic bags and other recycling materials. One of the first questions that needed an answer was whether the owner of the property had permission to operate a recycling plant from the premises, meaning whether he had rezoned it for that purpose. Apart from the recycling plant’s being located right next to a natural water course (which also raised a few environmental eyebrows), questions were also being asked about the risk this filthy operation holds, not only for the environment but also for residents’ health. The newspaper wanted to know if the municipality’s health inspector had ever taken the time to go and investigate. The most important question was, if the operation was found to be illegal, what the municipality planned to do about it. What legal action will the property owner face if found to be in contravention of zoning regulations? In response to these questions, Makhado Municipal spokesperson Mr Louis Bobodi confirmed that the property in question had indeed not been zoned for the purpose it was being used for. “The property is duly and formally zoned Residential 1, wherein a dwelling unit is a primary right, which means that only a house for the purpose of dwelling is permitted as per the current zoning-sanctioned process,” said Bobodi. He added that no application had been received from the property owners to rezone the premises. When asked whether any special permission had been obtained from the municipality to allow such recycling operations to take place, Bobodi’s answer was a definite no. “There is absolutely no consent that has been issued to operate a recycling plant - hence the property is zoned Residential 1,” said Bobodi. In conclusion, Bobodi said that the municipality was now quite aware of the situation and had since served the owner with a contravention letter, which further instructed the owner to discontinue with the operation within a prescribed period. “Non-adherence of which will lead to punitive steps as dictated by the Land Use Scheme and By-Law. Our By-Law has provision for a fine and imprisonment,” said Bobodi. Regarding the prescribed period the person has to respond, Bobodi indicated that it was 30 days. Although we could not confirm exactly when the owner of the property was served the notice to cease his operations, the Zoutpansberger will monitor the situation to find out whether or not the owner of the property actually complies. 