Three phone calls can make a person’s blood pressure go through the roof within three seconds, namely a calls from someone who wants to sell you something; a call from a political party; and, perhaps worst of all, a call from a social worker. As the world celebrated international Social Work Day on 15 March this week, senior social worker for the South-African Women’s Federation (SAVF) in Louis Trichardt Ms Friede Meissenheimer said that, unfortunately, social work is a profession with a somewhat negative reputation. “The first thing people think when the words ‘social worker’ come up, is ‘Those people who take children’. We are sort of damned if we do, and damned if we don’t … When serious cases of abuse come to light, the first thing people ask is ‘Where were the social workers?’ When it comes to cases where children do have to be removed to ensure their safety, we are the evil people who break up families. Yet few people actually know how wide and deep our services really go. I always tell my clients that we don’t look for reasons to remove children; we look for ways to keep families together,” said Meissenheimer. Friede said that social work was rendered on several different levels, including prevention, early intervention, statutory work and reunification and aftercare. “Prevention is often our community-work campaigns, such as Child Protection Week, 16 Days of Activism, and International AIDS day. It can also include specific programmes, such as bullying programmes or emotional intelligence programmes presented in schools. The aim is in the name: to prevent cases of abuse and neglect from happening in the first place. Botswadi is an excellent example of an SAVF group that can be utilised for prevention. It can also include assisting people with access to services such as SASSA, food and clothing,” said Friede. The Botswadi programme is an SAVF initiative aimed at developing parenting skills. The second level of service delivery is early intervention. “This is often where cases are first brought to the attention of social workers. We know there are some issues that need to be attended to, but this can be done while the children remain in the home. This can also be referred to as family-preservation services, and can take the form of case work or group work. Groups can include parenting skills or marriage enrichment. It can also include working with families individually, through for example marriage counselling or individual counselling, as well as referrals to rehabilitation centres,” said Friede. After early intervention comes statutory intervention, when needed. “And yes, this is normally where children are removed from parental care but is also so much more than that! Services rendered included mediation, parenting plans, adoptions and then alternative care placements, such as foster care or placement in a child and youth centre,” said Friede. The final area of service delivery is reunification and aftercare. “When it becomes necessary to remove children from parental care, social workers always strive to reunite children with their families. While children are in alternative care, children and parents are supported with relevant services to ensure that reunification is a possibility,” said Friede. Regarding the above, Friede urged members of the public not to hesitate in calling their nearest social worker the next time they experience a crisis. “We are not quite the villains we seem – rather, superheroes without capes!” said Friede. For more information, phone Friede at the SAVF Louis Trichardt office at 015 516 3841. 