“I’m feeling overwhelmed, I still can’t believe I won the title of Stunning Goddess,” says Louis Trichardt resident Roshini Pakkiree. An excited and thankful Roshini was asked by the organiser of Shakti Beats during November 2021 if she would enter.  “I decided this was my chance to do a bit of modelling as I only did modelling in school,” Roshini says. The competition was for the ladies in the “Mrs” category. All of a sudden, she found herself being a finalist. They had to model Eastern wear, as well as formal wear and had to show elegance and poise. Other categories had a talent segment. Proceeds of the tickets went to charity for the aged. Roshini mentions that the competition had three categories, namely Teen, Miss and Mrs. There was also a Mr Elegance. “The age group for the ‘Mrs’ was unlimited – we were judged on style and elegance, as well as a modelling sequence that was shown to us. The pageant was held at Liberty Hall in Durban on 19 March. We had rehearsal two nights before the actual pageant. I was feeling a bit intimidated by my competitors – ranging from 28 to 57 years. I am 52,” Roshini says. “It was an amazing experience on stage, and I never dreamt I would win. I got lovely prizes and will have to keep my crown until the next pageant, which will take place next year. It felt really good to be allowed to meet wonderful, beautiful dynamic ladies - we became friends. I even met lovely teens,” Roshini says. A Facebook friend, Kesaven Pillay, mentioned: “The beauty of our culture shines through you.” Since winning the title of Stunning Goddess, Roshini was approached by Dr Carl Wilson of the USA to enter Miss Supermodel International, aged 18 and upwards. She will be a virtual contestant during the event that is taking place on 31 July this year at Lake Elsinore in California. Roshini is well-known for the two books that sh hase already published, namely: A Life Altered – my journey from tears to hope and Pieces of Us – how our marriage healed from the loss of a child. Readers can look forward to her third book, which is about faith – no title yet and still underway. 