Many residents of the Soutpansberg would have found themselves in the dark and without any electricity on Thursday morning, 24 March, but this is not due to load shedding. Eskom last week notified consumers in the area that they will have to endure a marathon 12-hour long power outage from 06:00 to 18:00 on 24 March. The customers to be affected are Eskom customers at Valdezia feeding from the Louis Trichardt substation; and Makhado Municipality customers feeding from the Louis Trichardt substation including the town itself, Levubu, Bandelierkop, Mara, Tshikhodobo, Zamekomste, Magau, Manavhela, Khuda Matshavhawe, Mashau, Tshilaphala and Mashau Tondoni. Eskom goes on to thank residents for their cooperation regarding this and apologised in advance for any inconvenience caused. What the notice does not say, is why the electricity supply is being interrupted. Over the last couple of weeks, rumours started doing the rounds that the Makhado Municipality’s main feeder from Eskom at the Louis Trichardt substation was on the brink of total collapse. Some sources said that the main feeder was damaged, prompting the municipality to make use of the standby feeder, which is also on the brink of collapse. Apparently, this problem will cost hundreds of millions of Rands to fix with Eskom saying it is not their problem, and the Makhado Municipality saying they have no money. Makhado Municipality’s spokesperson Mr Louis Bobodi was asked to respond to these rumours. “It is absolutely not true to insinuate that the substation is on the verge of collapse or that the town is running on an un-coping standby feeder. The issue of Eskom is neither here nor there,” said Bobodi. In the absence of a clear indication from Eskom of why Thursday’s interruption is taking place, and amidst the rumours, many assumed that Eskom’s 12-hour planned electricity outage was to address the issue of the main feeder and standby transformer. It turns out that this is not the case. Eskom’s media department was asked to give more details on the work to be done at the Louis Trichardt substation and if this work entailed fixing the “damaged” transformers. Eskom, however, responded that there is nothing wrong with the substation and that the planned interruption was due to the commissioning of a new plant. No further details were supplied. The Zoutpansberger did, however, managed to gain some insight into the “commissioning of a new plant” through unofficial channels. Why it is so difficult to get an official explanation of what is going on is not sure. It was said that the 12-hour shutdown was to allow time for Eskom technicians to upgrade the town’s main substation to a higher MVA rating. This, it is said, will stimulate the local economy by allowing developers a higher KVA amount than the current 50 KVA amount of electricity allowed. The exact surplus capacity that would be available after the upgrade, could not be confirmed, but the newspaper will stay on the story. Coming back to the rumour. It turns out that the two transformers referred to are not the town’s main feeder, but the main 66 KVA and standby 66 KVA transformers feeding the Levubu area. These two transformers are said to be inoperative and the line to Levubu dead as a doornail. Apparently, electricity to Levubu is now being ring-fed from other lines. This, however, could also not be confirmed.