A month has passed after the launch of the Zoutpansberger’s Baobab Champion project and, depending at what stage children from the four participating schools finally got round to planting their seeds, young baobabs are sprouting everywhere! The Baobab Champion project was launched in honour of well-known Louis Trichardt resident Oom Frans van der Merwe, who passed away on 30 December last year at the age of 83. He was a nature lover with a specific love for baobab trees. The project was made possible, thanks to a donation by his family and in conjunction with Dr Sarah Venter’s Baobab Foundation. The four participating schools are Ridgeway College, Louis Trichardt High School, Laerskool Louis Trichardt and the CVO Skool Zoutpansberg. The project is presented in the format of a competition, to create excitement and purpose. The four schools mentioned above were invited to get involved (We would have loved to ask more schools, but the project would have become just too unmanageable). All four of these schools were visited with the Zoutpansberger to outline the basic idea of the project and Dr Venter shared her wealth of knowledge during a talk with the children. Afterwards, all the competing children were handed a baobab-planting starter kit and were told what would be expected of them in the coming months. Included in each learner’s Baobab Champion starter kit were five planting bags; a sachet containing 15 baobab seeds (three seeds per planting bag as not all seeds germinate); a booklet with information about baobabs and the projects of the Baobab Foundation, and five tags to identify each planting bag for data recording and record keeping. Each starter kit also contains an 80g bag of Baobab Powder superfood, sponsored by EcoProducts, and a 10ml bottle of BaoCare Clear skincare oil for people with spotty or oily skins. As the window period for geminating the seeds was closing fast (before the end of February), the children were asked to get their seeds in the ground as soon as possible. The Zoutpansberger asked these children last week to take the first of three measurement of their plants, as well as a selfie with their tallest plant, and send through the details to the newspaper (We have to apologise as some confusion seems to have crept in about where the measurement information should be sent to). Judging by the response, most plants appear to have grown between 8cm and 10cm by the end of last week. Some children, such as Elme Burger of Laerskool Louis Trichardt, however, reported that none of the seeds had germinated yet. Great excitement occurred on Monday this week when one of her seeds eventually broke ground. (Baobab seeds are known for not all germinating). We also have the over-achievers. One such tree belongs to another Laerskool Louis Trichardt student, Chaeli Thompson. By Thursday last week, her tallest tree was higher than 18cm already. Overall, most of the bags supplied for planting the seeds had apparently yielded at least one or two trees. Some were even fortunate enough to boast three or four seeds that germinated. As we move closer to winter, these little trees will slow down in growth, eventually losing their leaves and stop growing altogether until the warmer spring months. Some measurements will be taken and more data collected on the project at that time. 