One thing that is beyond dispute (besides the existence of God and his sly, ever-vigilant counterpart) is that man will probably never run out of ideas to acquire ill-begotten gains, usually at the expense of the neighbour he is supposed to love. For these endeavours he is usually enthusiastically and ably assisted by the devil and his cronies. Take the latest scam to swindle people out of their heard-earned (currently probably limited) monetary assets as an example. You are sitting on your couch, peacefully watching your favourite binge-worthy offering by Netflix, when you suddenly receive an SMS: “Message from Post Office South Africa: An international delivery is at your local storage. Click here for more info erojod.com/f8dFAXy”. Intrigued, somewhat non-plussed, you click on the link, all the while wondering how you had forgotten about an international package you had ordered. Once the next page opens, you see a legitimate-seeming page with the Post Office (PO) logo, as well as a notice informing you that “You have a pending delivery. Use your unique tracking code to track and receive your item”, as well as your “unique tracking code” in a nice little block and the option to “Track your item”. Once you have “tracked” your item, you go to a new page that, very helpfully, supplies you with “package information”, including your status [held at depot; unpaid import duty] shipping via: Intl tracked courier and [Very Importantly] Customs fee: R40. Then, at the bottom, “Schedule delivery now”. Now the niggling little voice that had you consider the state of your mental acuity and (in)ability to recall doing something as mundane as ordering an international package starts to give a twinge. “What have you done? What did you order, from where? And how much did it cost if the import duty is R40?” Questions to your better half shed no light on the situation, and you decide to ignore it. Two days later, another “reminder” arrives, this time with the great news that your package has arrived at “our drop-off address. Approve your pick-up here…” with another HTML link. You are reminded of the “import duty” that you have to pay to lay claim to this mysterious package. This time, however, you are informed that you package could not be delivered “because you were not at home”. [A blatant lie – you have not moved out of your house for three days, since this has been a long weekend]. You are now informed that the package will be returned, or you can still redeem it by paying the “shipping costs” – which is probably quite a bit more than the “import duties” mentioned in the first SMS. You are requested to confirm your phone number by pressing another option on the page. Once again, you decide to ignore it. The very next day, another SMS arrives with an “Urgent reminder: Dear [?], your package has been in our storage since last week. Resolve or we return it to the sender: ctuvt.com/X43xnud”. Now, if no alarm bells or red lights had been going off in your mind yet, surely the fact that whoever sent this package did not even take the trouble to add your name on the waybill – hence the “Dear [whoever]” – should alert you that something is seriously wrong here. And the address for verification is not the same one as before! Nevertheless, as a good citizen who does not suspect his fellow man of skulduggery and nefarious activities unduly, you decide to play it safe and enquire from the PO. You acquire the number of an official there and politely phone to ask whether this trusted and friendly individual can shed more light on this conundrum. Said official asks some pertinent questions and then points out that certain vital information has been omitted in the messages – just as you suspected. The PO will never send out a notification without your name being listed as the receiver. It will also not be asked to confirm your phone number electronically; you will be required to provide an ID when you collect the parcel at the PO. Lastly, the name of the sender of the notification will be added, since you will have to speak to that person to collect your parcel and ensure that the paperwork is in order before you pay any outstanding import duties there, at the PO itself. No money will be collected electronically as such a practice is too open to fraud. So, the long and the short of this story is that, unless you have made a legitimate order from another country and are expecting a package to arrive shortly, please ignore any unsolicited messages informing you that “your international package has arrived; please pay the import duties electronically to be able to claim your package”. This is just another in a long line of scams designed to steal your money. And even if R40 is not all that much (at least for some people), the fact remains that these thieves are unscrupulous and have no qualms about taking money that they are not entitled to – your money that you have worked for that you should not lose to the greed of someone else!