When Tanganedzani Tshitavhe from Block G in Thohoyandou applied for the South African National Antarctic Programme, run by the Department of Forestry, Fisheries and Environment, what never crossed her mind was she would actually be considered. As fate would have it, though, she was selected to join the 22-member overwintering crew that left the country on Tuesday (12th) for the 2022/2023 polar expedition to sub-Antarctic Marion Island. Tshitavhe, a master of environmental sciences student at Univen, was assigned as a meteorological technician on board the SA Agulhas II polar research vessel, where she will be actively participating in the running of surface meteorological and atmospheric research projects. The projects are assigned by the marine section of the South African Weather Service and the Department of Forestry, Fisheries, and Environment. She will be performing surface meteorological observations, conduct upper-air weather balloon releases, and maintain and verify equipment at Marion Island’s remote station. The expedition runs for 15 months, meaning that the crew is due to return by June 2023. The 26-year-old was very excited about joining the expedition. “I love travelling, and this could not have come at a better time. This will be the first time I leave the country and an opportune time for me to explore the world,” she said in an interview with the media prior to her departure. “I am aware of what awaits me there. I have been told of the extreme cold weather and, like others before our group, I will adapt as a resident of the island. I have a duty there and will do my best for my country. I will be doing some weather observations and report back to the South African Weather Services on a daily basis, and this I will do to the best of my ability.” She expressed her heartfelt gratitude and appreciation to her supervisor and mentor, Mr Edmore Kori, for igniting her passion for science and research. Univen spokesperson Dr Takalani Dzaga too could not hide his excitement. “This is a great achievement for her. Even though we are regarded as a rural university, we are able to produce competent graduates who are able to compete with others globally. This is also inspirational, and many students will be motivated as a result,” he said. Tshitavhe worked as an academic writing consultant and tutor at the University of Venda, where she conducted geography tutorials. She also worked as a project assistant for the Small Grants Programme (SGP) of the Global Environmental Facility (GEF) at the Vhembe Biosphere Reserve, under the Institute for Rural Development, University of Venda. To top that off, she was also the coordinator of the 2021 Mini-Habitable Planet Workshop (HPW) school programme under the Applied Centre for Climate Change and Earth Systems Science (ACCESS). Tshitavhe currently serves as deputy secretary of the Vhembe Biosphere Reserve (VBR) Board, is a member of the South African Youth Biodiversity Network (SAYBN) and the Global Youth Biodiversity Network (GYBN), she is a Black Women in Science (BWIS) fellow, co-founder and director of Venus Environmental Services, and operations manager of Waste Away Foundation (NPO). She also volunteers and participates in community development programmes in the Vhembe Biosphere Reserve. 