On 16 December last year, members of the SPCA Louis Trichardt set off on their fifth annual Christmas Outreach, this time visiting Tshiozwi Village in the Sinthumule area. Their aim was to go and spread some love and cheer to animals and humans where these are needed most. “Our outreach team and a few extra volunteers set off, armed with vaccines, de-worming medication, dog food, human food and treats and parcels for tiny humans too. Thank you to everyone who ordered one of our SPCA Christmas Hampers this year and chose to top it up with an extra R10. Thanks to you, we could make up more than 100 food and treat parcels for the village dogs and cats,” said local SPCA spokesperson Alicia Thomas. The team also handed out collars and leads to make sure they break as many chains as possible as part of their “Break the Chains” campaign. “Thank you to everyone who has donated collars, old and new, and a special thanks to Sigrid Jefferies at Trali Africa Trading for all the collars she so kindly makes and donates for this cause,” said Alicia. A special shout-out also went to Deon from NTK, Sharon Nerahoo from JJJ Auto & Bosch Car Services, Marcia Potgieter, Jana Snyman, Elsie Went and Lené Smith for the contributions they made to help the Christmas Outreach a special one for the humans and the animals. “Thank you to each and every volunteer who joined us; a day like this would not be possible if not for your help. Thank you for your time, passion and love, you helped make this cruel and crazy world of ours quite a bit brighter and kinder for so many animals,” said Alicia. Alicia said that the two small words “thank you” would never be enough to express their gratitude towards all who support their outreach team initiative. “If you would like to become part of this team, you are welcome to get into contact with us, or if you would like to make a donation towards our Outreach Programme, you are welcome to do so,” said Alicia. Donations can be paid into account name SPCA Louis Trichardt, Standard Bank account number 282 374 639, branch code 052549. “Please clearly mark all EFTs as OUTREACH PROGRAMME for our records,” urged Alicia. “We are making a difference, no matter how small it may seem ... For those that we are able to help, it most definitely makes the world of difference!” concluded Alicia. 