On 13 February this year, Pediatric Care Africa will embark on their third annual “Ride for a Child” charity motorbike ride over a distance of 7 000km across South Africa, with visits to the Beitbridge Border Post, Musina and Louis Trichardt on 14 February. The purpose of this mega-charity ride is to generate funds for their “1000 surgeries for 1000 children Campaign #HELPMYOP” and to raise awareness about the plight of children who requires surgeries and medical treatment and simply cannot get help because their parents are too poor or perhaps they have no parents. “We are hoping to assist 70 children with surgeries and 400 children with visits to private specialist doctors in 2022,” said Surika van der Merwe in a press release issued by the organisation. As in previous years, the group of bikers will be led by Dr André Hattingh, CEO and founder of Pediatric care Africa, on his Harley Davidson Road King. “We invite individual guest riders and motor bike clubs across South Africa to join him anywhere on our route around South Africa and to ride for a child,” said Surika. According to Surika, a misconception exists that you must belong to a motorbike club or ride a specific brand of motorbike to ride with them. “Nothing is further from the truth. It does not matter what you ride, if you are a lone wolf on a Triumph or a schoolboy on his 50cc Yamaha. If you are a legal motorbike rider and can do at least 100km per hour, you are welcome and we invite you to join us and let your exhaust speak for the children we are desperately trying to protect and assist,” said Surika. Riders are invited to ride along for a section of the route as sponsored riders, whereby they are sponsored for R1 per km by a friend, a company or themselves to benefit this charity ride. Now, more than ever, money is needed. “The past two years with the Covid pandemic and the severe restrictions that it placed on our ability to raise funds were not an easy time for us, considering that, since the beginning of the Covid pandemic, the demand for our service has skyrocketed 600%. Many more people simply lost their jobs and have difficulty taking care of their children through no fault of their own,” said Surika. To sponsor Dr Andre or a rider, visit www.pediatriccareafrica.org for sponsorship documents or phone 076 229 5663 for more information. 