Four-year-old Carmia du Plessis from Levubu urgently needs the Soutpansberg community’s help in obtaining a bigger special-needs stroller for her. Carmia was diagnosed at birth with Microcephaly cerebral palsy (quadriplegia), epilepsy, Corpus callosum and scoliosis. At present, the paediatricians cannot give her family a final medical diagnosis as her case is very complex and rare. Carmia attends therapy at the Louis Trichardt Memorial Hospital. Recently, her occupational and physiotherapist advised the family to look for a bigger stroller for her as she has outgrown her normal baby pram/stroller. No adjustments can be made to the existing stroller anymore. Sitwell is a medical company that specialises in these kinds of strollers and/or prams and the family are in desperate of a new one for Carmia. To help raise funds for such a stroller, Carmia’s grandmother, Dora Bester, recently started a BackaBuddy page. The page can be found at https://www.backabuddy.co.za/champion/project/carmia-bester “We can’t always carry her around if we go to town or just want to go for a stroll. We care for her 24 hours a day, feed her and bathe her. We are her ears and eyes and do home therapy with her as she cannot do anything for herself,” said Dora. Dora told the Zoutpansberger on Monday that they did not like asking for help, but that the cost of the special-needs stroller was just out of their reach. Priced at just over R28 000 and including courier costs, the stroller will set them back R30 000. Carmia’s mother, Marinda, is a single parent who has to take care of her and her brother Arnold, aged nine, on a R1 890 per month social grant. Arnold is tremendously supportive in helping to care for his little sister and loves her very much. According to Dora, the stroller will assist them tremendously, especially if they need to go out for things such as shopping. At this stage, Carmia must be carried everywhere. For Carmia, this is extremely uncomfortable. “We need to make her as comfortable as we can. We have also been told not to let her sit all the time. She can't even lift her head like a normal person,” said Dora. People wishing to support Carmia’s BackaBuddy fundraiser page are invited to do so. For more information, they are also welcome to phone Dora at Tel 079 353 7880 or mom Marinda at Tel 064 906 5770. 