Eleven amateur sport clubs making use of municipal infrastructure in Louis Trichardt are still in the dark as to their future. It seems as if the Makhado Municipality is pushing ahead with its plans to try and terminate the 99-year lease agreements with these clubs. The decision to terminate the contracts was taken during the 159th virtual special council meeting of the Makhado Municipality on Monday, 31 May, 2021. Following the Council decision, notices of their intention to terminate the clubs’ lease agreements were served on the affected clubs. The notices stated that the decision to terminate the lease agreements was made because the terms of the existing agreements do not promote the objects of Section 152 of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa that facilities should be available to all communities. The Council also argued that the amount of R10 per year (with a 10% escalation per annum) payable by the lessee agreed upon just before the new democratic dispensation took over was done in bad faith and was not market related. The clubs were given six months notice that their contracts would be terminated. The affected clubs responded by forming the Louis Trichardt Sport Chairpersons Association. The association declared their intention to oppose the Makhado Municipality’s intentions in court and each club was asked to contributed financially to help cover the legal costs. Louis Trichardt attorney Dr Suwil Rudolph was asked to assist the clubs and in October last year Adv Piet van Niekerk and Adv Stephanie Green met with representatives of the clubs to discuss the way forward. The general feeling was that this matter is sure to make its way to the High Court. During the meeting, it was stated that the only way that the affected clubs would be forced to vacate their premises would be if the municipality obtained a court order. The clubs would then need to oppose such an application. For the last couple of months the issue has been somewhat quiet. That was until last week Wednesday when Dr Rudolph met with representatives of the municipality to discuss the issue. Rudolph afterwards communicated to the clubs that the municipality wanted to know if they can negotiate regarding rent. “I explained to them that every club is unique and each would have to make their own submission. If no agreement is reached, then arbitration should take place,” said Rudolph. He added that the municipality confirmed that their valuer has already determined a rent amount for each club based on the property value. Regarding the property value, Rudolph, asked the municipality what they are going to do about improvements made to the properties by the clubs themselves. “They have not reneged on their intention to terminate and I asked them to first go and decide what they want to do. It is futile to talk about rent if they plan to terminate the agreements,” said Rudolph. Rudolph said that the municipality did enquire about the value of improvements on premises and whether clubs would vacate the properties if they are paid out for that. “My answer was that it would be a counter claim, should they continue and win the case. They then wanted to know why we oppose termination and I answered them that they will find out in court,” said Rudolph. He concluded that the issue has again been referred to Council and they are now awaiting the municipality’s response.