The Zoutpansberger, in partnership with the Baobab Foundation, launched an ambitious school project this week, with the future aim of boosting the region’s wild baobab population. Dubbed the Baobab Champion project, just more than 230 baobab-planting starter kits were distributed to participating pupils at Ridgeway College, Louis Trichardt High School, Laerskool Louis Trichardt and the CVO Skool Zoutpansberg. Where did it all start? Louis Trichardt residents will remember Oom Frans van der Merwe, most notably for his decades-long crusade against the illegal posting of abortion posters. He could often be seen roaming the town’s streets and removing these unsightly adverts. But Oom Frans was also a huge nature lover, with a particular fondness for trees. Sadly, Oom Frans passed away on 30 December last year at the age of 83. Because he used to be a former journalist of the Zoutpansberger, his family said afterwards that they would like to make a donation towards a project in his honour. A decision was taken that no better way existed to honour his legacy than to launch a baobab-planting project, the benefits of which future generations can enjoy for hundreds of years to come. However, because we knew little about these ancient giants, the Zoutpansberger decided to bring in professional help in the form of Dr Sarah Venter of the Baobab Foundation. With a doctor’s degree in botany - specialising in baobab trees - few people know more about the trees than Dr Venter. Without her inputs and support, this project would not have gotten off the ground. But why baobabs? Baobabs are iconic and important African trees and form an integral part of many savannah ecosystems, such as those found north of the Soutpansberg. These trees also play an important role in rural people’s lives and not only provide nutrition but also provide an income to thousands of rural African families. The sad part is that baobab tree numbers are decreasing. The reason for this is quite interesting. “The main distribution agent for baobab seeds is not wildlife but humans. People have always been eating the seeds and spitting them out, after which they would germinate. But it is the bottle neck between germinating and then surviving to adulthood that is causing the problem. Our habitats are transforming. With more peri-urban development, there are more villages and therefore also more livestock such as goats. More game can also be found in nature reserves. These animals all eat the young baobab trees and put immense pressure on the land. That is why new baobab numbers are dwindling,” said Dr Venter. The hope is that this project, however small it might seem, will boost the number of baobab trees in the wild. “People see a lot of baobab trees around here, but in two or three hundred years there are not going to be new ones, because we are not planting them now. The Baobab Foundation strapline says it best: Creating a culture of caring. It is about realising that the baobab is actually a symbol of all our environments. It is not an elephant or a lion or whatever, because those are sitting in the Kruger Park. But baobabs can be all around us and can live for very long. So, if we can start protecting baobabs and plant them, we can start protecting habitats. It is about creating a culture of caring for something you are not going to reap the fruit of,” said Dr Venter. What does the project entail? The project is presented in the format of a competition, to create excitement and purpose. The four schools mentioned above were invited to get involved (We would have loved to ask more schools, but the project would have become just too unmanageable). All four of these schools were visited on Monday and Tuesday, with the Zoutpansberger outlining the basic idea of the project and Dr Venter sharing her wealth of knowledge during a talk with the children. Afterwards, all the competing children were handed a baobab-planting starter kit and were told what would be expected of them in the coming months. The children and schools will be evaluated on how many seeds they are able to germinate, who is able to grow the most trees and who has the tallest trees after a specific period. At the end of the year, the finalists from each school will be invited for an all-expenses-paid trip to Big Tree at Sagole (near Tshipise) – the biggest and oldest baobab tree in the world. What is in the box? Included in each learner’s Baobab Champion starter kit are five planting bags; a sachet containing 15 baobab seeds (three seeds per planting bag as not all seeds germinate); a booklet with information about baobabs and the projects of the Baobab Foundation, and five tags to identify each planting bag for data recording and record keeping. (The tags were sponsored by the Zoutpansberg Private Hospital, who expressed a keen interest in getting involved with the project. For this, we thank them). Each starter kit also contains an 80g bag of Baobab Powder superfood, sponsored by EcoProducts, and a 10ml bottle of BaoCare Clear skincare oil for people with spotty or oily skins. The excitement was contagious “The children’s excitement in being part of the project was electrifying. It gives one hope to see that today’s children do care about their future and the legacy they leave behind, especially regarding the environment. We do hope that they spread the message and the ‘culture of caring’ mentioned by Dr Venter far and wide,” said Andries van Zyl, news editor of the Zoutpansberger. As the window period for geminating the seeds is closing fast (before the end of February), all are keen to get going. Over the next few months, the Zoutpansberger will monitor the project and report back on the progress. 