Almost two decades after the application for the Bushvalley township development outside of Louis Trichardt was first submitted, developers finally got the green light to proceed after approval for the project was published in the Provincial Gazette of 11 February under Notice 184 of 2022. The initial propagators of the development included Ian McDonald and Herman Scheepers, who made their first informal residential application in November 2004, which was then approved in principle by the Makhado Municipality in May 2005. When the technical planning and development design was complete, a formal application was submitted in November of 2005. The development was to take place on several portions of the farm Vondeling. The development, however, hit several snags along the way and basically fell dormant after Scheepers passed away in 2014. But new life was blown into the proposed development in 2020 when the African Group of Properties Limited stepped in, buying the portions of land earmarked for development from landowner McDonald. The African Group of Properties Limited then submitted a new application for the township development which, as stated, was granted. This process took almost two years. According to Ms Lizet Joubert of Lizet Joubert Properties, they sold almost 80% of the residential properties within the first three months of marketing the township development in 2020, with prices ranging between R330 000 and R480 000 per stand. The Bushvalley township is a just-more-than-34-hectare development, about half a kilometre east of Kameel Street. It comprises 234 residential sites. The smallest stands are 600m² and the largest 3 083m². The average stand size is 1 572m² and the prevailing stand size is 1 000m². The development of these erven will take place in two phases. This development includes two high-density housing sites in each of the two phases of about 1 hectare each. At the entrance to the development from Bauhinia Street, two business properties of just more than 2 000m² and 3 000m² are also envisaged. According to the township approval, the African Group of Properties Limited will be responsible for the consolidation of the seven portions of the farm Vondeling on which the development is situated. They will also be responsible for the provision and installation of water, electricity, and sanitation, as well as the construction of roads and storm-water drainage in and for the township. Regarding this, Joubert said the developers were eager to get started and said that property buyers might be able to start building within the next three months. Water connections have already been made by the Vhembe District Municipality and the groundwork regarding streets and electricity supply has already been done. Streets will be paved, boasting bird names such as Babbler-, Woodpecker-, Cormorant-, Lourie- and Bee-Eater Street. 