Efforts put in place by law-enforcement agencies to fight crime and corruption at Beitbridge Border Post seem to be yielding some results. On 26 January, members of the Hawks’ Serious Corruption Investigation Unit apprehended two security officers, Tshilidzi Samuel Masutha (35) and Ronewa Makhovha (31), who were stationed at the border post, for alleged corruption, theft of a motor vehicle, contravention of Section 88 of the Customs and Excise Act 91 of 1974 and defeating the ends of justice. The allegations date back to 18 December last year when the two security officers allegedly connived with Kholisani Nkomo, an international Zimbabwean truck driver, who was stopped at the port of entry’s search point by officials of the South African Revenue Service (SARS). The truck, which raised suspicions, was impounded for a mandatory search, but the driver allegedly promised the officers gratification for the release of the truck. According to a media release made by the Hawks, one of the security officers allegedly tried to persuade the SARS officials, who were still in the process of impounding the truck, into accepting Nkomo’s bribe, but they refused. The truck was finally impounded and kept under the watch of another security guard, who allegedly abandoned his post, during which time the truck disappeared. SARS suspected the truck to be carrying illegal goods but was gone before they could thoroughly search it. The Hawks, in conjunction with the SARS Anti-Corruption unit, instituted an investigation, and warrants of arrest were authorised against the suspects. Nkomo was arrested on 27 December 2021 at Beitbridge’s port of entry on his way back from Gauteng. He was kept in custody until he appeared in the Musina Magistrate’s Court on 26 January this year. He was released on R3 000 bail. Masutha (employed by Fidelity) and Makhovha (employed by SMG Security Services) also appeared in the Musina Magistrate’s Court on 27 January. They will remain in custody until 2 February 2022 for a formal bail application. 