The South African National Road Agency Ltd (SANRAL) warned this week that motorists travelling north could expect deviations on the N1 just north of Musina in Limpopo. This, says SANRAL in a media statement, is because of a necessary revised configuration on the N1 to enable the construction of a tie-in of the new ring road into the existing N1 between the old R572 intersection, opposite the China Mall, and the temporary deviation intersection to the R572, some 1,2km further north. According to Hennie Kotze, project engineer at SANRAL’s Northern Region, construction is scheduled to take place from this week until 31 July 2022 and will result in the closure of the existing N1 between these two points. Motorists and others using the N1 in both directions and those who wish to gain access to the R572 from the N1 and from the R572 will be affected. Access to and from Elias Ramuthiveli Street to these routes will also be affected. Road users will be accommodated as follows: * From Musina along the N1 towards Beitbridge and the R572 - With the existing N1 being permanently closed off just north of the old R572 intersection with the N1, road users will be diverted sharp left opposite the China Mall onto a deviation (at the first intersection – indicated as intersection 1 on the accompanying Intersection 1 diagram). Turn right at the first intersection and continue towards intersection 2. At intersection 2, those heading for Beit Bridge will continue straight and eventually merge with the existing N1 at intersection 3. Road users on their way to the R572 will take the left slip lane at intersection 2 and eventually merge with the R572 along the current R572 deviation. * From Beitbridge along the N1 towards the R572 and Musina - with the existing N1 being closed off permanently at the existing temporary R572 intersection, road users will be diverted gently to the right (as indicated on the accompanying Intersection 3 diagram). Road users on their way to the R572 are to continue to intersection 2 and use the right-turning lane at the intersection. After stopping and turning right, continue on the current R572 deviation until it merges with the R572. Those heading to Musina along the N1 will continue through intersection 2. At intersection 1, they will have to take the sharp-left-turning lane and go through another sharp right turn (opposite the China Mall), where they will merge with the existing N1 to Musina. * From R572 to Musina, Beitbridge and Elias Ramuthiveli Street - from the R572 in the direction of Musina – use the existing deviation just past the Sediba (Elegant) Diesel Depot & Truck Stop and continue along the deviation until the first new temporary intersection (as indicated in the accompanying Intersection 2 diagram). After stopping, road users heading for Musina and Elias Ramuthiveli Street will turn sharp right and, after a second stop, will join the N1 Beitbridge Musina traffic through a second right turn in the intersection. Those heading for Beitbridge will, after the first stop, take the slip lane to the left, joining the N1 Musina – Beitbridge traffic. At the next intersection, indicated as intersection 1 on the accompanying diagrams, road users heading for Musina will take the slip lane to the left and go through another sharp right turn (opposite the China Mall) before joining the existing N1 towards Musina. Those heading for Elias Ramuthiveli Street will continue straight through the intersection into Elias Ramuthiveli Street, after stopping. “SANRAL apologises for any inconvenience caused and appreciates the cooperation and patience of road users during the construction period. We furthermore appeal to motorists to approach construction areas with caution, to reduce speed and always be on the lookout for pedestrians and construction workers. We will endeavour to complete the work as soon as possible,” said Kotze. 