It is getting increasingly more difficult to get clear answers from local authorities on issues negatively impacting on residents, as was again evident the past week with both the Makhado Municipality and the VDM seemingly pleading ignorance. On 2 February, Democratic Alliance (DA) councillor in the Makhado Municipality, Cllr Pierre Smalle issued a press release stating that the DA in Limpopo has written to the MEC of CoGHSTA, Basikopo Makamu, to intervene after the Makhado Municipality apparently switched off the electricity supply to the Albasini Dam raw water treatment plant. The power was apparently cut at the pump stations on 31 January this year due to the Vhembe District Municipality’s (VDM) non-payment of their electricity bill. “The electricity supply to the water plant was seemingly cut due to an electricity debt exceeding R13 million. This cut in electricity supply has seen the main reservoir and Mowkop reservoir not receiving any water. As a result, residents and businesses in the new town, old town, industrial area, Makhado Park, Eltivillas, Padkamp and Tshikota areas of the municipality have been left to endure water shortages,” said Smalle in his statement. Water shortages in Louis Trichardt and surrounds have become an almost weekly, if not daily, occurrence as VDM keeps on struggling with an ageing water supply infrastructure. On Tuesday this week, water supply to town was again shut down due to a water pipe leak at the water treatment plant at the Albasini Dam. At the time of going to press it could not be confirmed whether or not VDM resumed with the pumping of water. Just the day before, on Monday, the VDM issued a statement saying that several households in Louis Trichardt would suffer water shortages after one of the water pumps at the Mowkop reservoir was stolen. “A case of theft has been opened at Louis Trichardt Police station,” said the VDM. As water is a basic human right, the Zoutpansberger asked Makhado municipality’s spokesperson, Mr Louis Bobodi, to confirm whether or not they had cut off the electricity supply to the treatment plant, thereby allowing taps in Louis Trichardt to run dry again. He was also asked whether or not Vhembe was in arrears on their electricity bill and what the total amount was? The newspaper also wanted to now from Bobodi what arrangement was made between Makhado and the VDM to address the situation. For those who do not know, Makhado is responsible for electricity supply in the municipal area, while the VDM is responsible for water supply and sanitation. Bobodi’s response came as a surprise. “The municipality is not aware of that,” he said. The newspaper then referred him to councillor Smalle’s press release and asked him if he is sure that they don’t know anything about the cutting of electricity at the water plant. He responded a second time stating: “We are not aware.” In the meantime, the Zoutpansberger also asked the VDM spokesperson, Mr Matodzi Ralushai, if he had seen the DA statement and if he could comment on the allegation that the electricity supply was cut due to their non-payment of electricity accounts. His response was, to say the least, extremely vague. He indicated that he has seen the DA statement and that the VDM and Makhado Municipality are working on the problem. “The two institutions are committed to ensure that all processes to ensure that residents get water are adhered to and any problem get the necessary attention,” Ralushai said. He was again asked to clarify whether or not electricity supply to the treatment plant and pump stations was cut due to their non-payment of accounts. Ralushai avoided a direct answer, merely stating that: “The two institutions always engage if there are matters that [need] intervention … even [the] issues you raised [form] part of that administrative responsibility”. The Zoutpansberger then managed to obtain copies of the three “Special Termination Notices” issued by the Makhado Municipality against the Vhembe District Municipality for Erf Nr 91 0001 0000 (indicated as ‘Albasini Kampong’) for 31 January this year. The notice numbers are 6637 (for an outstanding amount of R17 640.22), 6638 (for and outstanding amount of R5 506 748.23) and 6639 (for an outstanding amount of R8 096 672.75). Armed with these three notices, the Zoutpansberger asked Bobodi to reconsider his response that the municipality was not aware of the issue. His response was again extremely vague and confusing. “It is a standard procedure that we issue notices to whoever owes the municipality, and issuing notices doesn't not mean that we will cut,” said Bobodi. Bobodi was again asked to just confirm whether or not they had cut the electricity supply to the treatment plant and pump stations. To this he responded: “We did issue notices as per standard protocol to all those who are owing us without particularising. We still have to issue them to whoever default to make payments,” Bobodi said. So at this stage it would seem that the Makhado Municipality might or might not have cut the electricity supply on 31 January. They might or might not have issued the above-mentioned notices and they might or might not have made an arrangement with the VDM for payment of their outstanding account. The Makhado Municipality might or might also not know about the whole issue, but judging by theirs and the VDM’s response, they know exactly what is going on.