Taps in Vhembe remain dry as load shedding continues, and residents’ patience is wearing thin. The situation is exacerbated when, in times when water is actually available, millions of litres are going to waste because of poor maintenance, pipe bursts and an apparent total disregard by the people in charge to conserve this scarce resource. With most dams in the Vhembe District filled to capacity, few people realise that this natural resource can actually run out or dry up. A good example of where poor management and maintenance of water infrastructure have led to a massive water crisis is in Gqeberha (Port Elizabeth) where the city has reached its “Day Zero”, although the Nelson Mandela Municipality is denying this. The issue of water wastage is becoming more and more relevant. Over the past few weeks, several residents have reported that millions of litres are going to waste at a municipal site along Kort Street in Louis Trichardt. The site, used by municipal workers and contractors, features a water outlet where construction vehicles can fill up. The problem is that this outlet apparently remains open constantly, even when trucks are not filling up. On 14 June this year, the newspaper asked Makhado Municipality spokesperson Mr Louis Bobodi if the municipality was aware of this wasteful practice and whether they were the authority responsible for the site. Despite numerous follow-up requests and a commitment by Bobodi that he would check, no response was ever received from him. On Tuesday, 28 June, the municipal spokesperson for the Vhembe District Municipality (VDM), Mr Moses Shibambu, was asked if he could respond to the question. He responded the same day that he would be taking the matter up with their general manager of technical services. A week went by before Shibambu replied on Tuesday this week, indicating that the site in question is being utilised by VDM. Although the site is utilised by VDM, Shibambu stated that a certain contractor who is doing road construction for the Makhado Municipality was identified as the guilty party for always leaving the outlet open. “The matter has been taken to Makhado’s municipal manager,” Shibambu said. One can obviously understand residents’ frustration with the authorities regarding their apparent lacklustre response to reports of pipe bursts, water leaks and other water problems, such as the case in Kort Street. Vhembe took a whole week to respond to the newspaper’s enquiry, while Makhado just completely ignored it. In the meantime, residents should take note that their water problems are far from over. As already indicated by the VDM last week, Eskom’s continuous load shedding has severely crippled their ability to keep the reservoirs full. On Monday, VDM announced that, because of load shedding, electrical equipment had burnt out at the Albasini water-treatment plant, which resulted in the plant’s inability to pump water to Louis Trichardt and Tshikota. “Currently, there's no water at Louis Trichardt town and Tshikota,” said Vhembe. They assured residents, however, that their technicians were busy fixing the electrical issues and that the water supply would resume immediately after the replacement of the damaged electrical equipment. 