The Vhembe District Municipality (VDM) responded this week to the report issued by DA councillor Pierre Smalle of Ward 8 in the Makhado Municipality, following his oversight visit to the Albasini water treatment plant and main-line pump station to Louis Trichardt last week. In the report, Smalle highlighted several shortcomings regarding Vhembe’s failing water infrastructure at the treatment plant and pumpstations that continue to contribute to the chronic water shortages experienced by communities in and around Louis Trichardt. Smalle forwarded the report to the provincial leader of the DA, Mr Jacques Smalle, who in turn took the matter up with the MEC for Water and Sanitation, Mr Basikopo Makamu. “At present, my worry is that the VDM is only pumping water at 40% of capacity. Should anything else break, we will fall to about 20% capacity. With the water meters not working [and no way of calculating actual flow to reservoirs], it is one big mess. This is a time bomb waiting to explode for residents if things are not brought under control very soon,” said Jacques Smalle at the time. In response, VDM spokesperson Mr Matodzi Ralushai that they had been made aware of the report by the minister. “The issues raised [in the report] are currently being attended to and some have been resolved,” said Ralushai. He added that MEC Makamu had also contacted the VDM to explain the situation. Regarding the percentage of water being pumped to Louis Trichardt, Ralushai said that the number stood at over 70%, “however, due to the loadshedding, we were unable to supply some areas within Louis Trichardt and Tshikota”. Ralushai indicated that they had a plan to address the current water shortages in Louis Trichardt. “Vhembe is currently linking the new bulk-water projects with the Albasini Water Treatment Works to prevent regular pipe bursts as the bulk pipeline is new and, as a result, Makhado will have a sustainable water supply,” he said. As for the long-term solution to the chronic water problems experienced in Makhado, Ralushai said that the plan was for Makhado to receive water from the Nandoni Dam. “The VDM and Department of Water Affairs and Sanitation are currently finalising the bulk pipeline from Nandoni to Vuwani,” said Ralushai. Regarding the water shortage in Louis Trichardt and Tshikota the past few weeks, Ralushai indicated on Tuesday that the problems had been sorted out and that they had resumed pumping. This comes amid reports that some parts of Louis Trichardt are still without water. 