The National Prosecuting Authority (NPA) in Limpopo has welcomed the sentencing of three Zimbabwean nationals in the Regional Court in Musina last week for the smuggling of explosives. The three, Loveness Mbele (31), Lodrick Chidhakwa (34) and Tongai Mpofu (33), were arrested on 11 January this year. “The three accused came into South Africa without being in possession of travelling documents. They also did not pass through the Beitbridge Port of Entry and were not examined by an immigration officer,” said provincial NPA spokesperson Ms Mashudu Malabi-Dzhangi. According to Malabi-Dzhangi, Mbele admitted to the South African National Defence Force (SANDF) that the explosives found in their possession belonged to her, and that Lodrick and Tongai had only offered their assistance to carry the bags of explosives in return for payment as she had difficulty carrying them. “The bags contained six reels of detonating cord, 50 units of blasting cartridges and 65 units of connector capped fuses. On 3 March 2022, Mbele pleaded guilty to two counts related to the smuggling of explosives and immigration offences. Chidhakwa and Mpofu also pleaded guilty on charges of illegal immigration,” said Malabi-Dzhangi. In aggravation of sentence, State Advocate Patricia Dorothy Jacobs indicated to the court that the offences were serious, that illegal dealing in explosives had seriously increased and that syndicate kingpins used young ladies with small children as mules in an attempt to get the court's sympathy. The accused and like-minded persons, she said, should be prevented from bringing explosives into South Africa. She further submitted that immigrants had little to no regard for the laws of South Africa. Furthermore, Jacobs stated, the country faced a big economic crisis and was barely keeping up with its own residents' basic needs. The court agreed with the submissions of the State. Mbele was sentenced to 10 years’ direct imprisonment for the possession of explosives, 10 years for importing explosives and a fine of R5000 or three months’ imprisonment on a count of illegal immigration. Mbele's sentence was ordered to run concurrently with the main count of 10 years direct imprisonment. Chidhakwa and Mpofu were sentenced to three months’ direct imprisonment or to pay a fine of R5000 each. “The NPA welcomes the sentence and the DPP, Advocate Ivy Thenga, commends the good work of the SANDF in Musina and Advocate Jacobs for a sterling job,’ said Malabi-Dzhangi. 